A large literature examines the link between firm fundamentals and future stock returns
(e.g., Ou and Penman 1989; Bernard and Thomas 1990; Holthausen and Larcker 1992;
Sloan 1996; Abarbanell and Bushee 1997, 1998; Piotroski 2000). Typically, the
motivation for this line of research is that firm fundamentals are reflected in accounting data, which
are informative about a firm’s future cash flows, and that investors do not fully impound this
information into stock prices. But since financial statement information is backward-looking, it is
beneficial for investors to identify early indicators of firm fundamental changes that are not yet
reflected in financial statements. In this paper, we examine whether a change in analyst interest,
proxied by either the onset of non-covering sell-side equity analysts who participate in a firm’s
earnings conference call or by the absence of participation from covering analysts, is an early
indicator of not only firm fundamental changes, but also of future capital market activities and stock
returns.
Our focus on analyst interest stems from two observations. First, prior research shows that
analysts are sophisticated experts with deep industry knowledge (Mikhail, Walther, and Willis
1999; Asquith, Mikhail, and Au 2005; Kadan, Madureira, Wang, and Zach 2012). Based on their
knowledge of new products, customers, and market opportunities within an industry, analysts are
keenly aware of shifting competitive positions between industry leaders, laggards, up-and-comers,
and new entrant firms. Their expertise allows them to foresee future changes in firms’ fundamentals,
well before such information is reflected in the financial statements of individual firms. Second,
before an analyst initiates coverage on a firm, he or she must conduct due diligence. Analyst due
diligence has not been explored in the extant literature, as many of the activities analysts perform
before and after coverage initiations have been described as a black box (Ramnath, Rock, and
Shane 2008; Bradshaw 2011). We explore one aspect of analyst due diligence and document that
analysts regularly participate in a firm’s earnings conference calls before initiating coverage on the
firm.1 This practice is common because listening to and asking a question during a firm’s
conference call is part of an extensive, and sometimes lengthy, due diligence process. For example,
Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., a top-ranked sell-side equity research firm in Institutional Investor’s
annual All-American Research Survey, gives newly hired analysts up to one year to conduct due
diligence on firms before initiating coverage on them (Koo 2012). In a similar vein, analysts who
already cover a firm are often absent from, or silent on (do not ask a question), the firm’s conference
call if they have lost interest in the firm or intend to drop coverage.2
We posit that an onset of analysts who do not cover a given firm (‘‘non-covering analysts’’), but
participate in that firm’s earnings conference call, captures increasing analyst interest in the firm,
while analyst absenteeism captures decreasing analyst interest in the firm.